On Chomsky and the Two Cultures of Statistical Learning. Noam Chomsky
derided researchers in machine learning who use purely statistical methods to
produce behavior that mimics something in the world, but who don't try to
understand the meaning of that behavior. The transcript is now available, so let's
quote Chomsky himself: It's true there's been a lot of work on trying to apply
statistical models to various linguistic problems. I think there have been some
successes, but a lot of failures. There is a notion of success ... which I think is
novel in the history of science. It interprets success as approximating unanalyzed
data. This essay discusses what Chomsky said, speculates on what he might have
meant, and tries to determine the truth and importance of his claims. Chomsky's
remarks were in response to Steven Pinker's question about the success of
probabilistic models trained with statistical methods. What did Chomsky mean,
and is he right? What is a statistical model? How successful are statistical
language models? Is there anything like their notion of success in the history of
science? What doesn't Chomsky like about statistical models? What did
Chomsky mean, and is he right? I take Chomsky's points to be the following:
Statistical language models have had engineering success, but that is irrelevant to
science. Accurately modeling linguistic facts is just butterfly collecting; what
matters in science (and specifically linguistics) is the underlying principles.
Statistical models are incomprehensible; they provide no insight. Statistical
models may provide an accurate simulation of some phenomena, but the
simulation is done completely the wrong way; people don't decide what the
third word of a sentence should be by consulting a probability table keyed on
the previous two words, rather they map from an internal semantic form to a
syntactic tree-structure, which is then linearized into words. This is done
without any probability or statistics. Statistical models have been proven
incapable of learning language; therefore language must be innate, so why are
these statistical modelers wasting their time on the wrong enterprise? Is he
right? That's a long-standing debate. These are my answers: I agree that
engineering success is not the goal or the measure of science. But I observe that
science and engineering develop together, and that engineering success shows
that something is working right, and so is evidence (but not proof) of a
scientifically successful model. Science is a combination of gathering facts and
making theories; neither can progress on its own. I think Chomsky is wrong to
push the needle so far towards theory over facts; in the history of science, the
laborious accumulation of facts is the dominant mode, not a novelty. The science
of understanding language is no different than other sciences in this respect. I
agree that it can be difficult to make sense of a model containing billions of
parameters. Certainly a human can't understand such a model by inspecting the
values of each parameter individually. But one can gain insight by examing the
properties of the model—where it succeeds and fails, how well it learns as a
function of data, etc. I agree that a Markov model of word probabilities cannot
model all of language. It is equally true that a concise tree-structure model
without probabilities cannot model all of language. What is needed is a
probabilistic model that covers words, trees, semantics, context, discourse, etc.
Chomsky dismisses all probabilistic models because of shortcomings of particular
50-year old models. I understand how Chomsky arrives at the conclusion that
probabilistic models are unnecessary, from his study of the generation of
language. But the vast majority of people who study interpretation tasks, such as
speech recognition, quickly see that interpretation is an inherently probabilistic
problem: given a stream of noisy input to my ears, what did the speaker most
likely mean? Einstein said to make everything as simple as possible, but no
simpler. Many phenomena in science are stochastic, and the simplest model of
them is a probabilistic model; I believe language is such a phenomenon and
therefore that probabilistic models are our best tool for representing facts about
language, for algorithmically processing language, and for understanding how
humans process language. In 1967, Gold's Theorem showed some theoretical
limitations of logical deduction on formal mathematical languages. But this result
has nothing to do with the task faced by learners of natural language. In any
event, by 1969 we knew that probabilistic inference (over probabilistic
context-free grammars) is not subject to those limitations (Horning showed that
learning of PCFGs is possible). I agree with Chomsky that it is undeniable that
humans have some innate capability to learn natural language, but we don't
know enough about that capability to rule out probabilistic language
representations, nor statistical learning. I think it is much more likely that human
language learning involves something like probabilistic and statistical inference,
but we just don't know yet. Now let me back up my answers with a more
detailed look at the remaining questions. What is a statistical model? A statistical
model is a mathematical model which is modified or trained by the input of data
points. Statistical models are often but not always probabilistic. Where the
distinction is important we will be careful not to just say "statistical" but to use
the following component terms: A mathematical model specifies a relation
among variables, either in functional form that maps inputs to outputs (e.g. y = m
x + b) or in relation form (e.g. the following (x, y) pairs are part of the relation).
A probabilistic model specifies a probability distribution over possible values of
random variables, e.g., P(x, y), rather than a strict deterministic relationship, e.g.,
y = f(x). A trained model uses some training/learning algorithm to take as input a
collection of possible models and a collection of data points (e.g. (x, y) pairs) and
select the best model. Often this is in the form of choosing the values of
parameters (such as m and b above) through a process of statistical inference.
For example, a decade before Chomsky, Claude Shannon proposed probabilistic
models of communication based on Markov chains of words. If you have a
vocabulary of 100,000 words and a second-order Markov model in which the
probability of a word depends on the previous two words, then you need a
quadrillion (1015) probability values to specify the model. The only feasible way
to learn these 1015 values is to gather statistics from data and introduce some
smoothing method for the many cases where there is no data. Therefore, most
(but not all) probabilistic models are trained. Also, many (but not all) trained
models are probabilistic. As another example, consider the Newtonian model of
gravitational attraction, which says that the force between two objects of mass
m1 and m2 a distance r apart is given by F = G m1 m2 / r2 where G is the
universal gravitational constant. This is a trained model because the gravitational
constant G is determined by statistical inference over the results of a series of
experiments that contain stochastic experimental error. It is also a deterministic
(non-probabilistic) model because it states an exact functional relationship. I
believe that Chomsky has no objection to this kind of statistical model. Rather,
he seems to reserve his criticism for statistical models like Shannon's that have
quadrillions of parameters, not just one or two. (This example brings up another
distinction: the gravitational model is continuous and quantitative whereas the
linguistic tradition has favored models that are discrete, categorical, and
qualitative: a word is or is not a verb, there is no question of its degree of
verbiness. For more on these distinctions, see Chris Manning's article on
Probabilistic Syntax.) A relevant probabilistic statistical model is the ideal gas law,
which describes the pressure P of a gas in terms of the the number of molecules,
N, the temperature T, and Boltzmann's constant, K: P = N k T / V. The equation
can be derived from first principles using the tools of statistical mechanics. It is
an uncertain, incorrect model; the true model would have to describe the
motions of individual gas molecules. This model ignores that complexity and
summarizes our uncertainty about the location of individual molecules. Thus,
even though it is statistical and probabilistic, even though it does not completely
model reality, it does provide both good predictions and insight—insight that is
not available from trying to understand the true movements of individual
molecules. Now let's consider the non-statistical model of spelling expressed by
the rule "I before E except after C." Compare that to the probabilistic, trained
statistical model. This model comes from statistics on a corpus of a trillion words
of English text. The notation P(IE) is the probability that a word sampled from
this corpus contains the consecutive letters "IE." P(CIE) is the probability that a
word contains the consecutive letters "CIE", and P(*IE) is the probability of any
letter other than C followed by IE. The statistical data confirms that IE is in fact
more common than EI, and that the dominance of IE lessens wehn following a C,
but contrary to the rule, CIE is still more common than CEI. Examples of "CIE"
words include "science," "society," "ancient" and "species." The disadvantage of
the "I before E except after C" model is that it is not very accurate. A more
complex statistical model (say, one that gave the probability of all 4-letter
sequences, and/or of all known words) could be ten times more accurate at the
task of spelling, but offers little insight into what is going on. (Insight would
require a model that knows about phonemes, syllabification, and language of
origin. Such a model could be trained (or not) and probabilistic (or not).) As a
final example (not of statistical models, but of insight), consider the Theory of
Supreme Court Justice Hand-Shaking: when the supreme court convenes, all
attending justices shake hands with every other justice. The number of
attendees, n, must be an integer in the range 0 to 9; what is the total number of
handshakes, h for a given n? Here are three possible explanations: Each of n
justices shakes hands with the other n - 1 justices, but that counts Alito/Breyer
and Breyer/Alito as two separate shakes, so we should cut the total in half, and
we end up with h = n × (n - 1) / 2. To avoid double-counting, we will order the
justices by seniority and only count a more-senior/more-junior handshake, not a
more-junior/more-senior one. So we count, for each justice, the shakes with the
more junior justices, and sum them up. Some people might prefer A, some
might prefer B, and if you are slow at doing multiplication or addition you might
prefer C. Why? All three explanations describe exactly the same theory — the
same function from n to h, over the entire domain of possible values of n. Thus
we could prefer A (or B) over C only for reasons other than the theory itself.
We might find that A or B gave us a better understanding of the problem. A and
B are certainly more useful than C for figuring out what happens if Congress
exercises its power to add an additional associate justice. Theory A might be
most helpful in developing a theory of handshakes at the end of a hockey game
(when each player shakes hands with players on the opposing team) or in
proving that the number of people who shook an odd number of hands at the
MIT Symposium is even. How successful are statistical language models?
Chomsky said words to the effect that statistical language models have had some
limited success in some application areas. Let's look at computer systems that
deal with language, and at the notion of "success" defined by "making accurate
predictions about the world." First, the major application areas: Search engines:
100% of major players are trained and probabilistic. Their operation cannot be
described by a simple function. Speech recognition: 100% of major systems are
trained and probabilistic, mostly relying on probabilistic hidden Markov models.
Machine translation: 100% of top competitors in competitions such as NIST use
statistical methods. Some commercial systems use a hybrid of trained and
rule-based approaches. Of the 4000 language pairs covered by machine
translation systems, a statistical system is by far the best for every pair except
Japanese-English, where the top statistical system is roughly equal to the top
hybrid system. Question answering: this application is less well-developed, and
many systems build heavily on the statistical and probabilistic approach used by
search engines. The IBM Watson system that recently won on Jeopardy is
thoroughly probabilistic and trained, while Boris Katz's START is a hybrid. All
systems use at least some statistical techniques. Now let's look at some
components that are of interest only to the computational linguist, not to the
end user: Word sense disambiguation: 100% of top competitors at the
SemEval-2 competition used statistical techniques; most are probabilistic; some
use a hybrid approach incorporating rules from sources such as Wordnet.
Coreference resolution: The majority of current systems are statistical, although
we should mention the system of Haghighi and Klein, which can be described as
a hybrid system that is mostly rule-based rather than trained, and performs on
par with top statistical systems. Part of speech tagging: Most current systems are
statistical. The Brill tagger stands out as a successful hybrid system: it learns a set
of deterministic rules from statistical data. Parsing: There are many parsing
systems, using multiple approaches. Almost all of the most successful are
statistical, and the majority are probabilistic (with a substantial minority of
deterministic parsers). Clearly, it is inaccurate to say that statistical models (and
probabilistic models) have achieved limited success; rather they have achieved a
dominant (although not exclusive) position. Another measure of success is the
degree to which an idea captures a community of researchers. As Steve Abney
wrote in 1996, "In the space of the last ten years, statistical methods have gone
from being virtually unknown in computational linguistics to being a fundamental
given. ... anyone who cannot at least use the terminology persuasively risks being
mistaken for kitchen help at the ACL [Association for Computational Linguistics]
banquet." Now of course, the majority doesn't rule -- just because everyone is
jumping on some bandwagon, that doesn't make it right. But I made the switch:
after about 14 years of trying to get language models to work using logical rules,
I started to adopt probabilistic approaches (thanks to pioneers like Gene
Charniak (and Judea Pearl for probability in general) and to my colleagues who
were early adopters, like Dekai Wu). And I saw everyone around me making the
same switch. (And I didn't see anyone going in the other direction.) We all saw
the limitations of the old tools, and the benefits of the new. And while it may
seem crass and anti-intellectual to consider a financial measure of success, it is
worth noting that the intellectual offspring of Shannon's theory create several
trillion dollars of revenue each year, while the offspring of Chomsky's theories
generate well under a billion. This section has shown that one reason why the
vast majority of researchers in computational linguistics use statistical models is
an engineering reason: statistical models have state-of-the-art performance, and
in most cases non-statistical models perform worst. For the remainder of this
essay we will concentrate on scientific reasons: that probabilistic models better
represent linguistic facts, and statistical techniques make it easier for us to make
sense of those facts. Is there anything like [the statistical model] notion of
success in the history of science? When Chomsky said "That's a notion of
[scientific] success that's very novel. I don't know of anything like it in the history
of science" he apparently meant that the notion of success of "accurately
modeling the world" is novel, and that the only true measure of success in the
history of science is "providing insight" — of answering why things are the way
they are, not just describing how they are. A dictionary definition of science is
"the systematic study of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural
world through observation and experiment," which stresses accurate modeling
over insight, but it seems to me that both notions have always coexisted as part
of doing science. To test that, I consulted the epitome of doing science, namely
Science. I looked at the current issue and chose a title and abstract at random:
Chlorinated Indium Tin Oxide Electrodes with High Work Function for Organic
Device Compatibility In organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), a stack of
multiple organic layers facilitates charge flow from the low work function [~4.7
electron volts (eV)] of the transparent electrode (tin-doped indium oxide, ITO)
to the deep energy levels (~6 eV) of the active light-emitting organic materials.
We demonstrate a chlorinated ITO transparent electrode with a work function
of >6.1 eV that provides a direct match to the energy levels of the active
light-emitting materials in state-of-the art OLEDs. A highly simplified green
OLED with a maximum external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 54% and power
efficiency of 230 lumens per watt using outcoupling enhancement was
demonstrated, as were EQE of 50% and power efficiency of 110 lumens per watt
at 10,000 candelas per square meter. It certainly seems that this article is much
more focused on "accurately modeling the world" than on "providing insight."
The paper does indeed fit in to a body of theories, but it is mostly reporting on
specific experiments and the results obtained from them (e.g. efficiency of 54%).
My conclusion is that 100% of these articles and awards are more about
"accurately modeling the world" than they are about "providing insight," although
they all have some theoretical insight component as well. I recognize that judging
one way or the other is a difficult ill-defined task, and that you shouldn't accept
my judgements, because I have an inherent bias. (I was considering running an
experiment on Mechanical Turk to get an unbiased answer, but those familiar
with Mechanical Turk told me these questions are probably too hard. So you the
reader can do your own experiment and see if you agree.) What doesn't
Chomsky like about statistical models? I said that statistical models are
sometimes confused with probabilistic models; let's first consider the extent to
which Chomsky's objections are actually about probabilistic models. In 1969 he
famously wrote: But it must be recognized that the notion of "probability of a
sentence" is an entirely useless one, under any known interpretation of this
term. His main argument being that, under any interpretation known to him, the
probability of a novel sentence must be zero, and since novel sentences are in
fact generated all the time, there is a contradiction. The resolution of this
contradiction is of course that it is not necessary to assign a probability of zero
to a novel sentence; in fact, with current probabilistic models it is well-known
how to assign a non-zero probability to novel occurrences, so this criticism is
invalid, but was very influential for decades. Previously, in Syntactic Structures
(1957) Chomsky wrote: I think we are forced to conclude that ... probabilistic
models give no particular insight into some of the basic problems of syntactic
structure. In the footnote to this conclusion he considers the possibility of a
useful probabilistic/statistical model, saying "I would certainly not care to argue
that ... is unthinkable, but I know of no suggestion to this effect that does not
have obvious flaws." The main "obvious flaw" is this: Consider: I never, ever,
ever, ever, ... fiddle around in any way with electrical equipment. She never,
ever, ever, ever, ... fiddles around in any way with electrical equipment.
* I never, ever, ever, ever, ... fiddles around in any way with electrical equipment.
* She never, ever, ever, ever, ... fiddle around in any way with electrical equipment.
No matter how many repetitions of "ever" you insert, sentences 1 and 2 are
grammatical and 3 and 4 are ungrammatical. A probabilistic Markov-chain model
with n states can never make the necessary distinction (between 1 or 2 versus 3
or 4) when there are more than n copies of "ever." Therefore, a probabilistic
Markov-chain model cannot handle all of English. This criticism is correct, but it
is a criticism of Markov-chain models—it has nothing to do with probabilistic
models (or trained models) at all. Moreover, since 1957 we have seen many
types of probabilistic language models beyond the Markov-chain word models.
Examples 1-4 above can in fact be distinguished with a finite-state model that is
not a chain, but other examples require more sophisticated models. The best
studied is probabilistic context-free grammar (PCFG), which operates over
trees, categories of words, and individual lexical items, and has none of the
restrictions of finite-state models. We find that PCFGs are state-of-the-art for
parsing performance and are easier to learn from data than categorical
context-free grammars. Other types of probabilistic models cover semantic and
discourse structures. Every probabilistic model is a superset of a deterministic
model (because the deterministic model could be seen as a probabilistic model
where the probabilities are restricted to be 0 or 1), so any valid criticism of
probabilistic models would have to be because they are too expressive, not
because they are not expressive enough. Colorless green ideas sleep furiously In
Syntactic Structures, Chomsky introduces a now-famous example that is another
criticism of finite-state probabilistic models: Neither (a) 'colorless green ideas
sleep furiously' nor (b) 'furiously sleep ideas green colorless', nor any of their
parts, has ever occurred in the past linguistic experience of an English speaker.
But (a) is grammatical, while (b) is not. Chomsky appears to be correct that
neither sentence appeared in the published literature before 1955. I'm not sure
what he meant by "any of their parts," but certainly every two-word part had
occurred, for example: "It is neutral green, colorless green, like the glaucous
water lying in a cellar." The Paris we remember, Elisabeth Finley Thomas (1942).
"To specify those green ideas is hardly necessary, but you may observe Mr. [D.
H.] Lawrence in the role of the satiated aesthete." The New Republic: Volume
29 p. 184, William White (1922). "Ideas sleep in books." Current Opinion:
Volume 52, (1912). But regardless of what is meant by "part," a
statistically-trained finite-state model can in fact distinguish between these two
sentences. Pereira (2001) showed that such a model, augmented with word
categories and trained by expectation maximization on newspaper text,
computes that (a) is 200,000 times more probable than (b). To prove that this
was not the result of Chomsky's sentence itself sneaking into newspaper text, I
repeated the experiment, using a much cruder model with Laplacian smoothing
and no categories, trained over the Google Book corpus from 1800 to 1954, and
found that (a) is about 10,000 times more probable. If we had a probabilistic
model over trees as well as word sequences, we could perhaps do an even
better job of computing degree of grammaticality. Furthermore, the statistical
models are capable of delivering the judgment that both sentences are
extremely improbable, when compared to, say, "Effective green products sell
well." Chomsky's theory, being categorical, cannot make this distinction; all it can
distinguish is grammatical/ungrammatical. Another part of Chomsky's objection
is "we cannot seriously propose that a child learns the values of 109 parameters
in a childhood lasting only 108 seconds." (Note that modern models are much
larger than the 109 parameters that were contemplated in the 1960s.) But of
course nobody is proposing that these parameters are learned one-by-one; the
right way to do learning is to set large swaths of near-zero parameters
simultaneously with a smoothing or regularization procedure, and update the
high-probability parameters continuously as observations comes in. And noone
is suggesting that Markov models by themselves are a serious model of human
language performance. But I (and others) suggest that probabilistic, trained
models are a better model of human language performance than are categorical,
untrained models. And yes, it seems clear that an adult speaker of English does
know billions of language facts (for example, that one says "big game" rather than
"large game" when talking about an important football game). These facts must
somehow be encoded in the brain. It seems clear that probabilistic models are
better for judging the likelihood of a sentence, or its degree of sensibility. But
even if you are not interested in these factors and are only interested in the
grammaticality of sentences, it still seems that probabilistic models do a better
job at describing the linguistic facts. The mathematical theory of formal languages
defines a language as a set of sentences. That is, every sentence is either
grammatical or ungrammatical; there is no need for probability in this
framework. But natural languages are not like that. A scientific theory of natural
languages must account for the many phrases and sentences which leave a native
speaker uncertain about their grammaticality (see Chris Manning's article and its
discussion of the phrase "as least as"), and there are phrases which some
speakers find perfectly grammatical, others perfectly ungrammatical, and still
others will flip-flop from one occasion to the next. Finally, there are usages
which are rare in a language, but cannot be dismissed if one is concerned with
actual data. For example, the verb quake is listed as intransitive in dictionaries,
meaning that (1) below is grammatical, and (2) is not, according to a categorical
theory of grammar. The earth quaked. ? It quaked her bowels. But (2) actually
appears as a sentence of English. This poses a dilemma for the categorical
theory. When (2) is observed we must either arbitrarily dismiss it as an error
that is outside the bounds of our model (without any theoretical grounds for
doing so), or we must change the theory to allow (2), which often results in the
acceptance of a flood of sentences that we would prefer to remain
ungrammatical. As Edward Sapir said in 1921, "All grammars leak." But in a
probabilistic model there is no difficulty; we can say that quake has a high
probability of being used intransitively, and a low probability of transitive use
(and we can, if we care, further describe those uses through subcategorization).
Steve Abney points out that probabilistic models are better suited for modeling
language change. He cites the example of a 15th century Englishman who goes
to the pub every day and orders "Ale!" Under a categorical model, you could
reasonably expect that one day he would be served eel, because the great vowel
shift flipped a Boolean parameter in his mind a day before it flipped the
parameter in the publican's. In a probabilistic framework, there will be multiple
parameters, perhaps with continuous values, and it is easy to see how the shift
can take place gradually over two centuries. Thus it seems that grammaticality is
not a categorical, deterministic judgment but rather an inherently probabilistic
one. This becomes clear to anyone who spends time making observations of a
corpus of actual sentences, but can remain unknown to those who think that the
object of study is their own set of intuitions about grammaticality. Both
observation and intuition have been used in the history of science, so neither is
"novel," but it is observation, not intuition that is the dominant model for
science. Now let's consider what I think is Chomsky's main point of
disagreement with statistical models: the tension between "accurate description"
and "insight." This is an old distinction. Charles Darwin (biologist, 1809–1882) is
best known for his insightful theories but he stressed the importance of accurate
description, saying "False facts are highly injurious to the progress of science, for
they often endure long; but false views, if supported by some evidence, do little
harm, for every one takes a salutary pleasure in proving their falseness." More
recently, Richard Feynman (physicist, 1918–1988) wrote "Physics can progress
without the proofs, but we can't go on without the facts." On the other side,
Ernest Rutherford (physicist, 1871–1937) disdained mere description, saying "All
science is either physics or stamp collecting." Chomsky stands with him: "You
can also collect butterflies and make many observations. If you like butterflies,
that's fine; but such work must not be confounded with research, which is
concerned to discover explanatory principles." Acknowledging both sides is
Robert Millikan (physicist, 1868–1953) who said in his Nobel acceptance speech
"Science walks forward on two feet, namely theory and experiment ...
Sometimes it is one foot that is put forward first, sometimes the other, but
continuous progress is only made by the use of both." After all those
distinguished scientists have weighed in, I think the most relevant contribution to
the current discussion is the 2001 paper by Leo Breiman (statistician,
1928–2005), Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures. In this paper Breiman,
alluding to C.P. Snow, describes two cultures: First the data modeling culture (to
which, Breiman estimates, 98% of statisticians subscribe) holds that nature can
be described as a black box that has a relatively simple underlying model which
maps from input variables to output variables (with perhaps some random noise
thrown in). It is the job of the statistician to wisely choose an underlying model
that reflects the reality of nature, and then use statistical data to estimate the
parameters of the model. Second the algorithmic modeling culture (subscribed
to by 2% of statisticians and many researchers in biology, artificial intelligence,
and other fields that deal with complex phenomena), which holds that nature's
black box cannot necessarily be described by a simple model. Complex
algorithmic approaches (such as support vector machines or boosted decision
trees or deep belief networks) are used to estimate the function that maps from
input to output variables, but we have no expectation that the form of the
function that emerges from this complex algorithm reflects the true underlying
nature. It seems that the algorithmic modeling culture is what Chomsky is
objecting to most vigorously. It is not just that the models are statistical (or
probabilistic), it is that they produce a form that, while accurately modeling
reality, is not easily interpretable by humans, and makes no claim to correspond
to the generative process used by nature. In other words, algorithmic modeling
describes what does happen, but it doesn't answer the question of why.
Breiman's article explains his objections to the first culture, data modeling.
Basically, the conclusions made by data modeling are about the model, not about
nature. (Aside: I remember in 2000 hearing James Martin, the leader of the
Viking missions to Mars, saying that his job as a spacecraft engineer was not to
land on Mars, but to land on the model of Mars provided by the geologists.) The
problem is, if the model does not emulate nature well, then the conclusions may
be wrong. For example, linear regression is one of the most powerful tools in
the statistician's toolbox. Therefore, many analyses start out with "Assume the
data are generated by a linear model..." and lack sufficient analysis of what
happens if the data are not in fact generated that way. In addition, for complex
problems there are usually many alternative good models, each with very similar
measures of goodness of fit. How is the data modeler to choose between them?
Something has to give. Breiman is inviting us to give up on the idea that we can
uniquely model the true underlying form of nature's function from inputs to
outputs. Instead he asks us to be satisfied with a function that accounts for the
observed data well, and generalizes to new, previously unseen data well, but may
be expressed in a complex mathematical form that may bear no relation to the
"true" function's form (if such a true function even exists). Chomsky takes the
opposite approach: he prefers to keep a simple, elegant model, and give up on
the idea that the model will represent the data well. Instead, he declares that
what he calls performance data—what people actually do—is off limits to
linguistics; what really matters is competence—what he imagines that they
should do. In January of 2011, television personality Bill O'Reilly weighed in on
more than one culture war with his statement "tide goes in, tide goes out.
Never a miscommunication. You can't explain that," which he proposed as an
argument for the existence of God. O'Reilly was ridiculed by his detractors for
not knowing that tides can be readily explained by a system of partial differential
equations describing the gravitational interaction of sun, earth, and moon (a fact
that was first worked out by Laplace in 1776 and has been considerably refined
since; when asked by Napoleon why the creator did not enter into his
calculations, Laplace said "I had no need of that hypothesis."). (O'Reilly also
seems not to know about Deimos and Phobos (two of my favorite moons in the
entire solar system, along with Europa, Io, and Titan), nor that Mars and Venus
orbit the sun, nor that the reason Venus has no moons is because it is so close
to the sun that there is scant room for a stable lunar orbit.) But O'Reilly realizes
that it doesn't matter what his detractors think of his astronomical ignorance,
because his supporters think he has gotten exactly to the key issue: why? He
doesn't care how the tides work, tell him why they work. Why is the moon at
the right distance to provide a gentle tide, and exert a stabilizing effect on earth's
axis of rotation, thus protecting life here? Why does gravity work the way it
does? Why does anything at all exist rather than not exist? O'Reilly is correct
that these questions can only be addressed by mythmaking, religion or
philosophy, not by science. Chomsky has a philosophy based on the idea that we
should focus on the deep whys and that mere explanations of reality don't
matter. In this, Chomsky is in complete agreement with O'Reilly. (I recognize
that the previous sentence would have an extremely low probability in a
probabilistic model trained on a newspaper or TV corpus.) Chomsky believes a
theory of language should be simple and understandable, like a linear regression
model where we know the underlying process is a straight line, and all we have
to do is estimate the slope and intercept. For example, consider the notion of a
pro-drop language from Chomsky's Lectures on Government and Binding
(1981). In English we say, for example, "I'm hungry," expressing the pronoun "I".
But in Spanish, one expresses the same thought with "Tengo hambre" (literally
"have hunger"), dropping the pronoun "Yo". Chomsky's theory is that there is a
"pro-drop parameter" which is "true" in Spanish and "false" in English, and that
once we discover the small set of parameters that describe all languages, and the
values of those parameters for each language, we will have achieved true
understanding. The problem is that reality is messier than this theory. Here are
some dropped pronouns in English. Linguists can argue over the interpretation
of these facts for hours on end, but the diversity of language seems to be much
more complex than a single Boolean value for a pro-drop parameter. We
shouldn't accept a theoretical framework that places a priority on making the
model simple over making it accurately reflect reality. From the beginning,
Chomsky has focused on the generative side of language. From this side, it is
reasonable to tell a non-probabilistic story: I know definitively the idea I want to
express—I'm starting from a single semantic form—thus all I have to do is
choose the words to say it; why can't that be a deterministic, categorical
process? If Chomsky had focused on the other side, interpretation, as Claude
Shannon did, he may have changed his tune. In interpretation (such as speech
recognition) the listener receives a noisy, ambiguous signal and needs to decide
which of many possible intended messages is most likely. Thus, it is obvious that
this is inherently a probabilistic problem, as was recognized early on by all
researchers in speech recognition, and by scientists in other fields that do
interpretation: the astronomer Laplace said in 1819 "Probability theory is
nothing more than common sense reduced to calculation," and the physicist
James Maxwell said in 1850 "The true logic for this world is the calculus of
Probabilities, which takes account of the magnitude of the probability which is,
or ought to be, in a reasonable man's mind." Finally, one more reason why
Chomsky dislikes statistical models is that they tend to make linguistics an
empirical science (a science about how people actually use language) rather than
a mathematical science (an investigation of the mathematical properties of
models of formal language). Chomsky prefers the later, as evidenced by his
statement in Aspects of the Theory of Syntax (1965): Linguistic theory is
mentalistic, since it is concerned with discovering a mental reality underlying
actual behavior. Observed use of language ... may provide evidence ... but surely
cannot constitute the subject-matter of linguistics, if this is to be a serious
discipline. I can't imagine Laplace saying that observations of the planets cannot
constitute the subject-matter of orbital mechanics, or Maxwell saying that
observations of electrical charge cannot constitute the subject-matter of
electromagnetism. It is true that physics considers idealizations that are
abstractions from the messy real world. For example, a class of mechanics
problems ignores friction. But that doesn't mean that friction is not considered
part of the subject-matter of physics. Plato's allegory of the cave Plato's caveSo
how could Chomsky say that observations of language cannot be the
subject-matter of linguistics? It seems to come from his viewpoint as a Platonist
and a Rationalist and perhaps a bit of a Mystic. As in Plato's allegory of the cave,
Chomsky thinks we should focus on the ideal, abstract forms that underlie
language, not on the superficial manifestations of language that happen to be
perceivable in the real world. That is why he is not interested in language
performance. But Chomsky, like Plato, has to answer where these ideal forms
come from. Chomsky (1991) shows that he is happy with a Mystical answer,
although he shifts vocabulary from "soul" to "biological endowment." Plato's
answer was that the knowledge is 'remembered' from an earlier existence. The
answer calls for a mechanism: perhaps the immortal soul ... rephrasing Plato's
answer in terms more congenial to us today, we will say that the basic
properties of cognitive systems are innate to the mind, part of human biological
endowment. It was reasonable for Plato to think that the ideal of, say, a horse,
was more important than any individual horse we can perceive in the world. In
400BC, species were thought to be eternal and unchanging. We now know that
is not true; that the horses on another cave wall—in Lascaux—are now extinct,
and that current horses continue to evolve slowly over time. Thus there is no
such thing as a single ideal eternal "horse" form. We also now know that
language is like that as well: languages are complex, random, contingent
biological processes that are subject to the whims of evolution and cultural
change. What constitutes a language is not an eternal ideal form, represented by
the settings of a small number of parameters, but rather is the contingent
outcome of complex processes. Since they are contingent, it seems they can only
be analyzed with probabilistic models. Since people have to continually
understand the uncertain. ambiguous, noisy speech of others, it seems they must
be using something like probabilistic reasoning. Chomsky for some reason wants
to avoid this, and therefore he must declare the actual facts of language use out
of bounds and declare that true linguistics only exists in the mathematical realm,
where he can impose the formalism he wants. Then, to get language from this
abstract, eternal, mathematical realm into the heads of people, he must fabricate
a mystical facility that is exactly tuned to the eternal realm. This may be very
interesting from a mathematical point of view, but it misses the point about what
language is, and how it works.
